generate/README.md, before:

# GenerateTestScript

A tool to write FHIR TestScript instances that are more readable, better maintainable and can leverage reusable building blocks.

The approach is to use a custom dialect to enhance the FHIR TestScript syntax with a custom dialect, which is transformed using XSL to a regular FHIR TestScript. The custom dialect may be mixed with normal FHIR TestScript syntax at will. The transformation also takes care of adding the boilerplate stuff: url, date, publisher, contact, origin and destination.

## Custom dialect

### Namespace

All the custom elements use the following namespace:

```xml
xmlns:nts="http://nictiz.nl/xsl/testscript"
```

### Recursive inclusion of components

One of the core principles in this method is that it should be possible to easily include other files as reusable components. Such a component includes everything that is needed for performing part of a test: the actions, the asserts, but also variables, fixtures, rules _and_ possibly other components.

To define a component, simply create an .xml file with the necessary content enclosed in the following tags:

```xml
<nts:component xmlns="http://hl7.org/fhir" xmlns:nts="http://nictiz.nl/xsl/testscript">
    ...
</nts:component>
```

Normally, these components are collected in a subdirectory called "_components" in the project folder. Additionally, the subdirectory "common-components" in the src-folder contains building blocks that can be used across *all* projects. See the section on building to override these locations.

A building block can then be included using:

```xml
<nts:include value=".." scope="project|common"/>
```

Where `value` should be the name of the file to include (the ".xml" part may be omitted). The `scope` attribute defaults to "project" if it is ommitted.

Alternatively, the following form may be used:

```xml
<nts:include href="..."/>
```

to refer to a file directly, relative from the input file.

*Note*: the transformation will take care of putting all included variables, fixtures, etc. in the right place in the resulting TestScript. If different components define the same variable, fixture, etc., it will be deduplicated. If they define a different variable, fixture, etc. with the same id, an error will be thrown.

#### Passing parameters

It is possible to pass parameters to included components, using either the `nts:with-parameter` element or attributes. The syntax is:

```xml
<nts:include value="..">
    <nts:with-parameter name="param1" value="...">
    <nts:with-parameter name="param2" value="...">
    ...
</nts:include>
```

or

```xml
<nts:include value=".." param1="..." param2="..." />
```

In the corresponding component, the variable can be used with the XSL syntax for variables:

```xml
<nts:component ...>
    <variable>
        <name value="foo"/>
        <defaultValue value="{$param1}"/>
    </variable>
</nts:component>
```

#### Default values

In a component, a default value for a variable can be added using the `nts:parameter` element. This way, a component can be included without specifying a parameter value, while the parameter value can be overridden by specifying an `nts:with-parameter` element while including. 

Compare the following two examples (the first wil result in a value of 'foo' for `{$param1}`, the second will result in a value of 'bar' for `{$param1}`):

```xml
<nts:include value="..">
    <nts:with-parameter name="param1" value="foo">
</nts:include>    
<nts:component ...>
    <nts:parameter name="param1" value="bar"/>    
    <variable>
        <name value="foo"/>
        <defaultValue value="{$param1}"/>
    </variable>
</nts:component>

<nts:include value=".."/> 
<nts:component ...>
    <nts:parameter name="param1" value="bar"/>    
    <variable>
        <name value="foo"/>
        <defaultValue value="{$param1}"/>
    </variable>
</nts:component>    
```

Parameters passed to a component are globally available in the entire chain of recursive includes from there on. So if you pass parameter `foo` when including component 1, and this component subsequently includes component 2, `foo` is available to both components. It is also possible to expand parameters when recursively including the next component (i.e. a component that gets passed `param` may use `<nts:with-parameter name="param2" value="{$param1}">` when including other components).

If you use a parameter in a component without passing it from the caller or without specifying a default value, an error will be thrown.

#### Conditional processing based on parameters

It is possible to activate or suppress elements in included files based on the passing of a parameter using the `nts:ifset` and `nts:ifnotset` attributes. For example:

```xml
<nts:component ...>
    <description nts:ifset="description" value="{$description}"/>
    <description nts:ifnotset="description" value="Test to serve {$resource} resources."/>    
</nts:component>
```

If the `description` parameter is omitted when including this component, the latter of the two `<description .../>` elements will be used to create an autogenerated description string. Otherwise, the first element is used to write out the given description in the output.

### Fixtures, profiles and rules

For fixtures, profiles and rules, custom elements have been made that are a bit more concise than their FHIR equivalents.
  
Fixtures and rules can be defined using:

```xml
<nts:fixture id=".." href=".."/>
<nts:rule id=".." href=".."/>
```

`href` is considered to be relative to a predefined fixtures folder. It defaults to the "_reference" folder directly beneath the project-folder. See the section on building to set an alternate location. All fixtures and rules in the "_reference"-folder are copied to the output folder.

A LoadResources script is generated for all fixtures in the "_reference"-folder. See the section on building on how to exclude files and/or folders from being added the LoadResources script. 

Profiles may be defined using:

```xml
<nts:profile id=".." value=".."/>
```

### Patient token and date T

There are two special elements for use cases that are common across Nictiz test scripts.

The first one for including the patient authorization token in the TestScript:

```xml
<nts:patientTokenFixture href="..">
```

The `href` attribute should point to the `Patient` instance containing the token, as is commonly done with the Nictiz test scripts, placed in the "_reference"-folder. The `nts:scenario` attribute on the TestScript root determines how this tag is expanded:

* for "server", a variable will be created which the test script executor can set, defaulting to the value from the fixture.
* for "client", the fixture will be included and a variable called "patient-token-id" will be created that reads the value from the fixture

The token filename should end with `token.xml` and the token id should start with `Bearer`.

The second element is to indicate that the "date T" variable should be defined for the testscript:

```xml
<nts:includeDateT value="yes|no">
```

If this element is present, and `value` is absent or set to "yes", a variable for setting date T will be included in the TestScript.

### Scenario: server (xis) or client (phr)

There may be differences for xis and phr scenarios in how a TestScript is transformed. The scenario must therefore be indicated using the following attribute on the `TestScript` root:

```xml
nts:scenario="server|client"
```

### Building different variants

It is possible to build different variants or _targets_ from the same source files that include different elements (these have to be defined using the `targets.additional` parameter during building, see the section on build script parameters further down this document on guidance). The `nts:in-targets` attribute can be used on elements to specify the targets where the element should end up in. If this attribute is absent, the element will be included in all targets. Mulitple targets may be separated by a space. The special target '#default' can be used for the default build.

For example, take the following snippet:

```xml
<assert>
   ...
</assert>   
<assert nts:in-targets="with-setup test">
   ...
</assert>
<assert nts:in-targets="#default">
   ...
</assert>
```

This specifies that:
* The first `assert` will be included in all targets.
* The second `assert` will be included in the targets 'with-setup' and 'test', but will not show up in the default build.
* The third `assert` will be included only in the default build (and thus not in 'with-setup' or 'test'). This construction can thus be used to _exclude_ elements from specific targets. 

### TouchStone stopTestOnFail extension
The TouchStone assert-stopTestOnFail extension is added to each assert with a default value of 'false' (e.g. the test continues running after a failed assertion). If you would like to override this value, add attribute `@nts:stopTestOnFail="true"` to `<assert>`.

```xml
<assert nts:stopTestOnFail="true">
    ...
</assert>
```

## Running the transformation

The transformation is called by the ANT build in `ant/build.xml`. For more information on the location of the inputs and outputs, see [the readme in the TestScripts repository](https://github.com/Nictiz/Nictiz-STU3-testscripts-src/blob/main/README.md).

## Building

There is an [Apache ANT](http://ant.apache.org/) based build file available (`ant/build.xml`) to facilitate building of NTS projects. The normal use of this build script is to keep it in the current folder structure and include/import it from another ANT build script, like:

```xml
<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<project basedir="." name="generateTestScriptsForProject">

    <include file="path/to/this/build.xml" as="base"/>
    
    <target name="build" depends="base.build">
        ...
    </target>        
</project>
```

### Folder structure

For the project build file, a particular folder structure is expected:
```
- Project1/          : A project dir
  - build.properties : A file where parameters to the build script may be set (see below).
  - InputFolder1/    : One or more dirs containg NTS files. WARNING: all folder names starting with an underscore are ignored, while all other folders are included!
  - \_components/    : The components specific for that project - may be overridden using the components.dir parameter
  - \_reference/     : The fixtures and rules for that project. This folder is copied verbatim to the output folder. 
```

### Build script parameters

The following build script parameters are required:
- `input.dir=/path/to/projectdir`: Use this folder as the input. Should be an absolute or relative location, compared to `build.xml`.
- `output.dir=path/to/output/projectdir`: Location for the output of the build script. _Warning_: existing content in this project output folder will be removed.
- `commoncomponents.dir=/path/to/common/components`: The location for common NTS components. Should be an absolute or relative path, compared to `build.xml`.
- `lib.dir=/path/to/lib/dir`: The location to place dependency's needed for building the project. This dir should be added to `.gitignore`.

The following optional parameters may be used:
- `outputLevel=<number>`: Increase or decrease verbosity of the build script (default = 1).
- `components.dir=/path/to/project/components`: An alternative location for project specific NTS components. Should be an absolute or relative path, compared to `build.xml`.
- `loadresources.exclude`: a relative path to a folder containing the fixtures to be excluded or to specific filenames. Multiple entries can be comma separated. `*` is accepted as a wildcard.
  ```
  loadresources.exclude = _reference/resources/resources-specific
  ```
- `targets.additional`: additional variations of input folders (_targets_) that should be generated. An extra target is specified as the name of the folder that should be generated, which should be an existing folder with the target name appended using a dash. For example, if the project folder contains the folder `Cert`, an extra target named "with-setup" is defined using:
  ```
  targets.additional=Cert-with-setup
  ```
  The TestScript resources can use the `nts:in-targets` to define which element should be included in a target (see above). Multiple extra targets may be separated using comma's.
- `version.addition`: a string that will be added verbatim to the value in the `TestScript.version` from the input file. If this element is absent, it will be populated with this value.

### Building multiple projects

An additional buildscript is available (`ant/build-multiple.xml`) to build multiple projects, as long as each project has a `build.properties` file to set the parameters for a normal build using the procedure described above. To use this script, you need to include it in another script and set the following:

* A fileset with the `id` set to `input.files` should be defined with all the `build.properties` files that need to be built.
* The `basedir` property should point to the same basedir that the `build.properties` files in the project folders use.

## Schematron

A schematron is available that can be used to check both the input TestScript files and the component files. It is reasonably complete and covers everything on the root level of the input files.

It can be found at `schematron/NictizTestScript.sch` relative to this README.

## Output logging

Because of the verbosity of the ANT build, the logging level is set to 1 (warning) and Saxon is set to not try to recover. When more verbose output is wanted, the logging level can be changed by setting the `-DoutputLevel=` parameter on the ANT build.

## Changelog

### 1.5.0
- Remove the date from TestScripts (MM-1976)
- Add the option to pass a version addition to the build script (MM-1976)
- Don't strip out unknown input elements in the NTS source file

### 1.4.0
- Add the option to build different variants of a folder that include/exclude parts in the output (HIT-15). 

### 1.3.0
- Remove the assumptions on folder structure and instead use explicit parameters to define input dir, output dir, common components dir and lib dir (HIT-12).

### 1.2.1
- Fixed a bug where a comma separated list in `loadresources.exclude` caused the process to crash.
- Fixed a bug were the process would crash if `loadresources.exclude` is not set.
- Ids of fixtures that are added to LoadResources are validated.
- Added support for asterisk wildcards in `loadresources.exclude`.
- A LoadResources script is not generated if there are no fixtures to generate it from.

### 1.2.0
- A LoadResources script is now generated for a project
- TouchStone stopTestOnFail extension is added to each assert

### 1.1.4
- Fixed a bug where an attribute in a non nts-namespace (for example `@xsi:*`) caused the process to crash.

### 1.1.3
- Fixed a bug where the `-Dtestscripttools.localdir` property did not work as expected. 

### 1.1.2
- Enabled `<nts:parameter>` within `<nts:component>` to be given an empty value.

### 1.1.1
- MM-1116 - Removed FHIR version from canonical.

### 1.1.0
- Restructuring and improving ANT build - enabling derived scripts, improving workflow. 

### 1.0.0
- First working version to build TestScripts from the NTS-format using ANT.

Commit message:

HIT-21: Make creating additional targets work when there are subdirs in an input folder

generate/README.md, after:

# GenerateTestScript

A tool to write FHIR TestScript instances that are more readable, better maintainable and can leverage reusable building blocks.

The approach is to use a custom dialect to enhance the FHIR TestScript syntax with a custom dialect, which is transformed using XSL to a regular FHIR TestScript. The custom dialect may be mixed with normal FHIR TestScript syntax at will. The transformation also takes care of adding the boilerplate stuff: url, date, publisher, contact, origin and destination.

## Custom dialect

### Namespace

All the custom elements use the following namespace:

```xml
xmlns:nts="http://nictiz.nl/xsl/testscript"
```

### Recursive inclusion of components

One of the core principles in this method is that it should be possible to easily include other files as reusable components. Such a component includes everything that is needed for performing part of a test: the actions, the asserts, but also variables, fixtures, rules _and_ possibly other components.

To define a component, simply create an .xml file with the necessary content enclosed in the following tags:

```xml
<nts:component xmlns="http://hl7.org/fhir" xmlns:nts="http://nictiz.nl/xsl/testscript">
    ...
</nts:component>
```

Normally, these components are collected in a subdirectory called "_components" in the project folder. Additionally, the subdirectory "common-components" in the src-folder contains building blocks that can be used across *all* projects. See the section on building to override these locations.

A building block can then be included using:

```xml
<nts:include value=".." scope="project|common"/>
```

Where `value` should be the name of the file to include (the ".xml" part may be omitted). The `scope` attribute defaults to "project" if it is ommitted.

Alternatively, the following form may be used:

```xml
<nts:include href="..."/>
```

to refer to a file directly, relative from the input file.

*Note*: the transformation will take care of putting all included variables, fixtures, etc. in the right place in the resulting TestScript. If different components define the same variable, fixture, etc., it will be deduplicated. If they define a different variable, fixture, etc. with the same id, an error will be thrown.

#### Passing parameters

It is possible to pass parameters to included components, using either the `nts:with-parameter` element or attributes. The syntax is:

```xml
<nts:include value="..">
    <nts:with-parameter name="param1" value="...">
    <nts:with-parameter name="param2" value="...">
    ...
</nts:include>
```

or

```xml
<nts:include value=".." param1="..." param2="..." />
```

In the corresponding component, the variable can be used with the XSL syntax for variables:

```xml
<nts:component ...>
    <variable>
        <name value="foo"/>
        <defaultValue value="{$param1}"/>
    </variable>
</nts:component>
```

#### Default values

In a component, a default value for a variable can be added using the `nts:parameter` element. This way, a component can be included without specifying a parameter value, while the parameter value can be overridden by specifying an `nts:with-parameter` element while including. 

Compare the following two examples (the first wil result in a value of 'foo' for `{$param1}`, the second will result in a value of 'bar' for `{$param1}`):

```xml
<nts:include value="..">
    <nts:with-parameter name="param1" value="foo">
</nts:include>    
<nts:component ...>
    <nts:parameter name="param1" value="bar"/>    
    <variable>
        <name value="foo"/>
        <defaultValue value="{$param1}"/>
    </variable>
</nts:component>

<nts:include value=".."/> 
<nts:component ...>
    <nts:parameter name="param1" value="bar"/>    
    <variable>
        <name value="foo"/>
        <defaultValue value="{$param1}"/>
    </variable>
</nts:component>    
```

Parameters passed to a component are globally available in the entire chain of recursive includes from there on. So if you pass parameter `foo` when including component 1, and this component subsequently includes component 2, `foo` is available to both components. It is also possible to expand parameters when recursively including the next component (i.e. a component that gets passed `param` may use `<nts:with-parameter name="param2" value="{$param1}">` when including other components).

If you use a parameter in a component without passing it from the caller or without specifying a default value, an error will be thrown.

#### Conditional processing based on parameters

It is possible to activate or suppress elements in included files based on the passing of a parameter using the `nts:ifset` and `nts:ifnotset` attributes. For example:

```xml
<nts:component ...>
    <description nts:ifset="description" value="{$description}"/>
    <description nts:ifnotset="description" value="Test to serve {$resource} resources."/>    
</nts:component>
```

If the `description` parameter is omitted when including this component, the latter of the two `<description .../>` elements will be used to create an autogenerated description string. Otherwise, the first element is used to write out the given description in the output.

### Fixtures, profiles and rules

For fixtures, profiles and rules, custom elements have been made that are a bit more concise than their FHIR equivalents.
  
Fixtures and rules can be defined using:

```xml
<nts:fixture id=".." href=".."/>
<nts:rule id=".." href=".."/>
```

`href` is considered to be relative to a predefined fixtures folder. It defaults to the "_reference" folder directly beneath the project-folder. See the section on building to set an alternate location. All fixtures and rules in the "_reference"-folder are copied to the output folder.

A LoadResources script is generated for all fixtures in the "_reference"-folder. See the section on building on how to exclude files and/or folders from being added the LoadResources script. 

Profiles may be defined using:

```xml
<nts:profile id=".." value=".."/>
```

### Patient token and date T

There are two special elements for use cases that are common across Nictiz test scripts.

The first one for including the patient authorization token in the TestScript:

```xml
<nts:patientTokenFixture href="..">
```

The `href` attribute should point to the `Patient` instance containing the token, as is commonly done with the Nictiz test scripts, placed in the "_reference"-folder. The `nts:scenario` attribute on the TestScript root determines how this tag is expanded:

* for "server", a variable will be created which the test script executor can set, defaulting to the value from the fixture.
* for "client", the fixture will be included and a variable called "patient-token-id" will be created that reads the value from the fixture

The token filename should end with `token.xml` and the token id should start with `Bearer`.

The second element is to indicate that the "date T" variable should be defined for the testscript:

```xml
<nts:includeDateT value="yes|no">
```

If this element is present, and `value` is absent or set to "yes", a variable for setting date T will be included in the TestScript.

### Scenario: server (xis) or client (phr)

There may be differences for xis and phr scenarios in how a TestScript is transformed. The scenario must therefore be indicated using the following attribute on the `TestScript` root:

```xml
nts:scenario="server|client"
```

### Building different variants

It is possible to build different variants or _targets_ from the same source files that include different elements (these have to be defined using the `targets.additional` parameter during building, see the section on build script parameters further down this document on guidance). The `nts:in-targets` attribute can be used on elements to specify the targets where the element should end up in. If this attribute is absent, the element will be included in all targets. Mulitple targets may be separated by a space. The special target '#default' can be used for the default build.

For example, take the following snippet:

```xml
<assert>
   ...
</assert>   
<assert nts:in-targets="with-setup test">
   ...
</assert>
<assert nts:in-targets="#default">
   ...
</assert>
```

This specifies that:
* The first `assert` will be included in all targets.
* The second `assert` will be included in the targets 'with-setup' and 'test', but will not show up in the default build.
* The third `assert` will be included only in the default build (and thus not in 'with-setup' or 'test'). This construction can thus be used to _exclude_ elements from specific targets. 

### TouchStone stopTestOnFail extension
The TouchStone assert-stopTestOnFail extension is added to each assert with a default value of 'false' (e.g. the test continues running after a failed assertion). If you would like to override this value, add attribute `@nts:stopTestOnFail="true"` to `<assert>`.

```xml
<assert nts:stopTestOnFail="true">
    ...
</assert>
```

## Running the transformation

The transformation is called by the ANT build in `ant/build.xml`. For more information on the location of the inputs and outputs, see [the readme in the TestScripts repository](https://github.com/Nictiz/Nictiz-STU3-testscripts-src/blob/main/README.md).

## Building

There is an [Apache ANT](http://ant.apache.org/) based build file available (`ant/build.xml`) to facilitate building of NTS projects. The normal use of this build script is to keep it in the current folder structure and include/import it from another ANT build script, like:

```xml
<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<project basedir="." name="generateTestScriptsForProject">

    <include file="path/to/this/build.xml" as="base"/>
    
    <target name="build" depends="base.build">
        ...
    </target>        
</project>
```

### Folder structure

For the project build file, a particular folder structure is expected:
```
- Project1/          : A project dir
  - build.properties : A file where parameters to the build script may be set (see below).
  - InputFolder1/    : One or more dirs containg NTS files. WARNING: all folder names starting with an underscore are ignored, while all other folders are included!
  - \_components/    : The components specific for that project - may be overridden using the components.dir parameter
  - \_reference/     : The fixtures and rules for that project. This folder is copied verbatim to the output folder. 
```

### Build script parameters

The following build script parameters are required:
- `input.dir=/path/to/projectdir`: Use this folder as the input. Should be an absolute or relative location, compared to `build.xml`.
- `output.dir=path/to/output/projectdir`: Location for the output of the build script. _Warning_: existing content in this project output folder will be removed.
- `commoncomponents.dir=/path/to/common/components`: The location for common NTS components. Should be an absolute or relative path, compared to `build.xml`.
- `lib.dir=/path/to/lib/dir`: The location to place dependency's needed for building the project. This dir should be added to `.gitignore`.

The following optional parameters may be used:
- `outputLevel=<number>`: Increase or decrease verbosity of the build script (default = 1).
- `components.dir=/path/to/project/components`: An alternative location for project specific NTS components. Should be an absolute or relative path, compared to `build.xml`.
- `loadresources.exclude`: a relative path to a folder containing the fixtures to be excluded or to specific filenames. Multiple entries can be comma separated. `*` is accepted as a wildcard.
  ```
  loadresources.exclude = _reference/resources/resources-specific
  ```
- `targets.additional`: additional variations of input folders (_targets_) that should be generated. An extra target is specified as the name of the folder that should be generated, which should be an existing folder with the target name appended using a dash. For example, if the project folder contains the folder `Cert`, an extra target named "with-setup" is defined using:
  ```
  targets.additional=Cert-with-setup
  ```
  The TestScript resources can use the `nts:in-targets` to define which element should be included in a target (see above). Multiple extra targets may be separated using comma's.
  Note: additional targets may only be defined on input folders, not on subfolders. If there are subfolders in the input folder, each variant of the input folder will contain the full set of input folders (but with slightly different content, of course).  
- `version.addition`: a string that will be added verbatim to the value in the `TestScript.version` from the input file. If this element is absent, it will be populated with this value. 

### Building multiple projects

An additional buildscript is available (`ant/build-multiple.xml`) to build multiple projects, as long as each project has a `build.properties` file to set the parameters for a normal build using the procedure described above. To use this script, you need to include it in another script and set the following:

* A fileset with the `id` set to `input.files` should be defined with all the `build.properties` files that need to be built.
* The `basedir` property should point to the same basedir that the `build.properties` files in the project folders use.

## Schematron

A schematron is available that can be used to check both the input TestScript files and the component files. It is reasonably complete and covers everything on the root level of the input files.

It can be found at `schematron/NictizTestScript.sch` relative to this README.

## Output logging

Because of the verbosity of the ANT build, the logging level is set to 1 (warning) and Saxon is set to not try to recover. When more verbose output is wanted, the logging level can be changed by setting the `-DoutputLevel=` parameter on the ANT build.

## Changelog

### 1.5.0
- Remove the date from TestScripts (MM-1976)
- Add the option to pass a version addition to the build script (MM-1976)
- Don't strip out unknown input elements in the NTS source file

### 1.4.0
- Add the option to build different variants of a folder that include/exclude parts in the output (HIT-15). 

### 1.3.0
- Remove the assumptions on folder structure and instead use explicit parameters to define input dir, output dir, common components dir and lib dir (HIT-12).

### 1.2.1
- Fixed a bug where a comma separated list in `loadresources.exclude` caused the process to crash.
- Fixed a bug were the process would crash if `loadresources.exclude` is not set.
- Ids of fixtures that are added to LoadResources are validated.
- Added support for asterisk wildcards in `loadresources.exclude`.
- A LoadResources script is not generated if there are no fixtures to generate it from.

### 1.2.0
- A LoadResources script is now generated for a project
- TouchStone stopTestOnFail extension is added to each assert

### 1.1.4
- Fixed a bug where an attribute in a non nts-namespace (for example `@xsi:*`) caused the process to crash.

### 1.1.3
- Fixed a bug where the `-Dtestscripttools.localdir` property did not work as expected. 

### 1.1.2
- Enabled `<nts:parameter>` within `<nts:component>` to be given an empty value.

### 1.1.1
- MM-1116 - Removed FHIR version from canonical.

### 1.1.0
- Restructuring and improving ANT build - enabling derived scripts, improving workflow. 

### 1.0.0
- First working version to build TestScripts from the NTS-format using ANT.
